# Grocery Store Checkout Simulation

## Overview
The Grocery Store Checkout Simulation provides an event-based representation of checkouts at a grocery store, encompassing both cashier-operated and self-checkout counters. By leveraging real Point-Of-Sale (POS) data[^1], this simulation offers a genuine portrayal of the grocery store checkout experience. The project identifies the best-fit statistical distribution for various events, ensuring increased realism.

A detailed paper explaining the project in German can be accessed at [Paper_German.pdf](Paper_German.pdf).

## Key Features
1. **Event-driven simulation**: The simulation progresses by processing events, such as customer arrivals and departures.
2. **Data-driven design**: The simulation uses real POS data[^1] to model behaviors and timings.
3. **Multiple checkouts**: The supermarket can feature a mix of cashier checkouts and self-checkouts.
4. **Customizable parameters**: Users can specify parameters such as the number of checkouts, arrival rates, processing rates, and others (see [Customizable Parameters](#customizable-parameters)).
5. **Logging**: The simulation logs various details, including individual events, customer details, and the queue lengths at different checkouts.

## Project Structure

The Simulation in [my_sim.py](my_sim.py) consists of four main classes:
1. **Event** - Represents an event in the simulation. Events can be either the arrival of a customer or the departure of a customer after checking out.
2. **Customer** - Represents a customer in the supermarket. Contains details such as arrival time, number of items, processing rate per item and the checkout where the customer is queued.
3. **Checkout** - Represents a checkout counter. Can be either a cashier checkout or a self-checkout. Contains details about the queue of customers waiting, the processing of customers and the status of the checkout.
4. **Simulation** - The main simulation class. Contains methods to generate customer arrivals, handle their processing, update the state of the system and log various events

There are two Notebook files:
1. [Parameter Extraction](parameter_extraction.ipynb) - Fitting of POS Data to the right distributions and calculates the parameters used in the `Simulation` class.
2. [Experiment Analysis](experiment_analysis.ipynb) - Analysis of the logs generated by the simulation for the three experiments (for experiment details see [Experiments](#experiments)).

## Simulation Flow
```mermaid
graph TD
    a[Start] --> b[Generate arrival]
    b --> c[Process next event]
    c --> n{Arrival <br>event?}
    n --> |Yes| d{Checkout <br> idle?}
    n --> |No| f[Handle departure]
    d --> |Yes| e[Schedule departure event]
    d --> |No| z[Add customer to queue]
    z --> h{Time limit <br> reached?}
    e --> h
    f --> j{Checkout <br> queue empty?}
    j --> |Yes| h
    j --> |No| l[Handle next customer in queue]
    l --> h
    h --> |No| b
    h --> |Yes| i[End]
```
The simulation is implemented so that the customer always chooses the shortest queue. If there are multiple queues with the same length, the customer randomly chooses one of the shortest queues.
## How To Use:

1. **Initialization**: <br> Create a simulation object by providing necessary parameters such as the number of cashier checkouts, self-checkouts, time constraint, etc. (see [Customizable Parameters](#customizable-parameters) for more details). 
```python
my_sim = simulation(num_cc=16, num_sc=1, t_max=10000)
```
2. **Run the simulation**: <br> Call the `simulate` method on the simulation object.
```python
event_log, customer_log, queue_log = my_sim.simulate()
```
3. **Export logs**: <br> Export the logs in the desired format.
```python
event_log.to_csv('event_log.csv')
customer_log.to_csv('customer_log.csv')
queue_log.to_csv('queue_log.csv')
```

Alternatively, you can use the `checkout`, `customer`, and `queue` classes to build your own simulation. 
Dependencies can be found in the [requirements.txt](requirements.txt) file.

## Customizable Parameters:
When initializing the simulation using the `Simulation` class, you can set various parameters to influence the behavior and outcome of the simulation. Here's a list of these parameters with brief descriptions:

1. `s_seed`: Seed for random number generation.
2. `t_max`: Duration of the simulation in seconds. 
3. `distribution`: Chosen distribution for processing times. Can be "POS" (based on Point-Of-Sale data) or "exp" (exponential).
4. `proc_exp_cc` & `proc_exp_sc`: Parameters for exponential distribution on cashier checkouts and self-checkouts, respectively.
5. `proc_pos_cc_loc`, `proc_pos_cc_scale`, `proc_pos_sc_loc`, `proc_pos_sc_scale`: Location and scale parameters for transaction time based on POS data for cashier and self-checkouts.
6. `arrival_rate`: Scale rate parameter for the exponential distribution of customer arrivals.
7. `num_cc` & `num_sc`: Number of cashier checkouts and self-checkouts, respectively.
8. `c_quant` & `sc_quant`: Quantity of customers that can be handled at once at cashier checkout and self-checkout, respectively.
9. `item_scale`: Scale parameter for generating the number of items a customer buys.

## Experiments
Three experiments are provided in the `main` method of [my_sim.py](my_sim.py):
1. 16 cashier checkouts, 1 self-checkout, 10.000 seconds time constraint.
2. 22 cashier checkouts, 1 self-checkout, 10.000 seconds time constraint.
3. 16 cashier checkouts, 2 self-checkouts, 10.000 second time constraint.

The logs for these experiments can be found in the [Logs](Logs) folder.

## Potential Use Cases:

- **Resource allocation**: Understand customer flow and wait times to optimize the number of active checkouts.
- **Enhancing customer experience**: Use insights from the simulation to develop strategies aimed at reducing wait times and improving the overall checkout experience.
- **Scenario analysis**: The simulation's versatility supports modeling of diverse scenarios, such as peak shopping hours, special sales events, or times with limited staff.

## Conclusion:
This simulation provides insights into how different numbers and types of checkouts affect the customer experience in a supermarket. By analyzing the logs, one can make informed decisions about optimizing the number and type of checkouts to minimize customer waiting times and improve efficiency.

[^1]: data Source: [Point of Sale (POS) Data from a Supermarket: Transactions and Cashier Operations](https://www.mdpi.com/2306-5729/4/2/67)


